Quick facts
Wilting, yellowing or browning, leaf drop and poor flowering are all common symptoms of a poorly plant
1
Problems often arise in winter, due to overwatering, poor light or dry air
2
Most houseplants recover quickly once a problem has been spotted and rectified
3
Getting started
Plants don’t naturally live indoors and houseplants are simply tender, often tropical, plants that we grow inside. Yet our homes can be quite challenging environments for them, with dry air, limited natural light and often irregular watering. So, it’s no wonder that most of us will have had a poorly houseplant at one time or another.
In the vast majority of cases, problems with our
houseplants
can be resolved by simply tweaking the growing environment and the care we give them. To do this, it’s firstly important to understand why a plant isn’t thriving by taking a closer look.
What you’ll need to give your plant a health check:
Gloves
Secateurs
Hand lens or magnifying glass
For reference: the plant’s label,
RHS Find a Plant
or a good houseplant book
Top Tip
If you have a large collection of houseplants, it’s a good idea to separate a poorly one from the rest, until you have worked out and treated the problem.
How to spot a poorly plant
Work out what’s wrong with your plant in ten easy steps:
Low light levels have led to leggy growth on this Syngonium
Check there’s enough light
Weak, spindly growth, pale leaves and poor flowering are all signs that a plant isn’t getting
enough light
. You might also see lower leaves turning yellow and falling.
Variegated
Variegated means having leaves or other plant parts with streaks, blotches or patches of different colours. Typically, these would be a combination of two colours, such as green and gold or green and white.
plants kept in a shady spot will often
revert
to green.
Bear in mind that over winter, when sunlight is weaker, houseplants should be kept near south- or west-facing windows. Wiping dust off leaves allows more sunlight to reach the leaf surface.
Leaf scorch on the leaves of a rubber plant (Ficus elastica) caused by too much direct sunlight
Check for too much light
Strong, direct sunlight, such as from a south-facing window in summer, can cause brown scorched patches on leaves and give them a washed-out appearance.
Shrivelled leaves on
shade-loving plants
are also a sign that the position is too sunny. On variegated leaves, sun scorch is more likely on the paler sections of leaf.
Wilting and yellowing are common signs of underwatering
Check there’s enough water
Wilted leaves, brown and crispy leaf edges and flowers that fade or fall quickly are all signs that a plant isn’t getting
enough water
. Unlike with overwatering (below), older leaves at the base of a dry plant will often yellow and fall first.
Insert your finger into the
compost
Can refer to either home-made garden compost or seed/potting compost: • Garden compost is a soil improver made from decomposed plant waste, usually in a compost bin or heap. It is added to soil to improve its fertility, structure and water-holding capacity. Seed or potting composts are used for growing seedlings or plants in containers - a wide range of commercially produced peat-free composts are available, made from a mix of various ingredients, such as loam, composted bark, coir and sand, although you can mix your own.
to check how moist it is a few centimetres down. If you can’t detect any moisture, your plant likely needs a more regular drink.
This succulent has suffered stem rot and complete collapse due to overwatering
Check for too much water
Overwatering can also cause wilting, and it’s easy to mistake this for a lack of water and drown a plant, especially over winter when growth slows. Lift your plant out of its pot to see if water has collected in the base, tipping away any excess.
Other signs of overwatering include old and new leaves yellowing and dropping at the same time, browning in the middle of leaves, mouldy patches on leaves and flowers, stem rot and dark, mushy roots. Regular overwatering can lead to
oedema
and whole plant collapse.
Low temperatures have blackened the new shoots of this Impatiens
Check the temperature
Consult the plant’s label,
RHS Find a Plant
or a good houseplant book to check the specific temperature requirements of your plant, and consider if that’s what it’s getting.
Leaves wilting, rolling, bleaching and going crispy suggest a plant is suffering from heat stress – common in very hot rooms like conservatories in mid-summer. Blackened leaves, leaf droop and whole plant collapse are symptoms of cold damage – commonly seen in unheated rooms, like porches, over winter.
Brown leaf tips and edges are a classic sign of low air humidity
Check
humidity
The concentration of water vapour in the atmosphere. This affects the rate at which plants transpire (lose water from their leaf pores), which in turn affects how much water their roots absorb from the soil. If air humidity is low, plants transpire quickly and become at risk of wilting if water is lost from the leaves faster than it can be absorbed by the roots. Different plants require different levels of humidity to thrive. Many tropical houseplants need high humidity and are best grown in a steamy bathroom, misted regularly or placed on a saucer of damp pebbles. In a greenhouse, humidity can be raised in hot weather by damping down (wetting) the floor or overhead misting.
Low air humidity (dry air) is a common cause of problems on foliage houseplants, especially over winter when the heating is on. You might see shrivelled, crispy leaves with brown tips and edges, plus early dropping of leaves,
buds
A bud is a small, undeveloped shoot that contains the potential for new growth. Buds are typically found on stems, where they can be apical (found at the tip) or axillary (found between leaf axils) and may develop into leaves, shoots or flowers.
and flowers.
Grey mould
on leaves and flowers, and stem rots on
cacti and succulents
, are signs the air is too moist, which is common in bathrooms.
The yellowing of these hydrangea leaves indicates a nitrogen deficiency
Check for nutrient deficiencies
Houseplants are often grown in the same pot for years and will quickly use up all the
nutrients
To grow well, plants need a wide range of nutrients in various amounts, depending on the individual plant and its stage of growth. The three key nutrients usually taken up from the soil are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Plants also need carbon, oxygen and hydrogen to make carbohydrates — their main energy source. Carbon and oxygen come from the air as carbon dioxide, while hydrogen is drawn from water absorbed by the roots. Other important soil nutrients include magnesium, calcium and sulphur. Most garden soils contain enough of these nutrients to support healthy plant growth.
in their compost. If growth seems lacklustre and flowering is poor, your plant may need repotting or feeding to give it a boost. Watering with tap water if you live in a hard water area can also lead to deficiencies.
See our
guide to nutrient deficiencies
for more help.
Mealybugs are commonly found on houseplants
Check for insects
Visible to the naked eye but more easily seen with a hand lens or magnifying glass,
sap
Sap is a fluid that circulates through a plant's vascular system, in a similar way to blood moving through our veins. Phloem sap carries the sugars produced in the leaves by photosynthesis down to roots and other storage organs, as well as carrying minerals and hormones. Xylem sap is watery and transports nutrients absorbed by the roots upwards to the rest of the plant. Some plants leak sap from wounds or pruning cuts, and this is known as bleeding.
-sucking insects such as
mealybugs
,
scale
and
glasshouse red spider mite
can affect a plant’s appearance and vigour. Small numbers can be easily wiped off, but you may need to treat larger infestations to stop them spreading.
This cyclamen has been infected by grey mould (Botrytis cinerea)
Check for disease
Houseplants can suffer from various diseases that affect their leaves, especially where
ventilation
The introduction of outdoor air into a space, for example, a greenhouse. This airflow can reduce temperature, replenish the gases absorbed by plants and keep down fungal diseases like grey moulds.
is poor. A fuzzy, grey-brown covering on stems, leaves or flowers suggests
grey mould
is the problem. A white dusting on leaves suggests
powdery mildew
, and dark spots with yellow margins suggests a fungal leaf spot. Houseplants can also suffer from
viruses
.
Calcium deposits on the leaves of this Calathea
Consider the growing environment
Plants kept near direct sources of heat, like radiators, often suffer scorched leaves, while draughts can cause leaf yellowing and dry leaf edges. If curtains are drawn on cold nights, plants on windowsills can suffer due to cold air being trapped between the window and curtain.
Pale spots are commonly caused by cleaning products and aerosols landing on leaves, while overhead watering with (hard) tap water can leave noticeable calcium deposits.
Helping your poorly plant
Once you have identified the problem, make adjustments to your care regime.
This might include increasing or decreasing watering, moving your plant to a sunnier, shadier, warmer or cooler spot, increasing
humidity
The concentration of water vapour in the atmosphere. This affects the rate at which plants transpire (lose water from their leaf pores), which in turn affects how much water their roots absorb from the soil. If air humidity is low, plants transpire quickly and become at risk of wilting if water is lost from the leaves faster than it can be absorbed by the roots. Different plants require different levels of humidity to thrive. Many tropical houseplants need high humidity and are best grown in a steamy bathroom, misted regularly or placed on a saucer of damp pebbles. In a greenhouse, humidity can be raised in hot weather by damping down (wetting) the floor or overhead misting.
, repotting, feeding or treating a pest or disease problem. Sometimes it takes a combination of these to see a positive change. See our
guide to growing houseplants
for further advice.
Cut off any mouldy, shrivelled, completely brown or completely yellow leaves with secateurs, as these won’t recover. But, leave any that are predominantly green until the plant has produced a fresh flush of leaves, or you could delay recovery.
Our
Houseplant 101 video series
is a great place to get practical guidance on caring for your houseplants.