Share this
In
recent years, houseplants have become more and more popular since they are a great
option for those who do not have room for outdoor plants or vegetables, yet still
want to channel their green thumb.
Before you introduce any houseplants to your home, you’ll want to determine environmental
factors such as lighting, temperature and space, as well as the time commitment
you may need to make to care for your plants. Pets can also be a consideration
when making your plant selection.
Lighting
One of the most obvious aspects to consider prior to selecting your new houseplants
is lighting. If you do not have good window access, you will need to consider using
grow lights for your new plants. Many grow lights have a timer so you can select
how long the light will be on for the plant to photosynthesize.
Lighting requirements found on plant labels can sometimes be confusing. Plants that
require high or direct light include most succulents and cacti. South or southwest-facing
windows would be ideal for these plants. Medium light plants do well in areas with
east-facing windows or west-facing windows. Medium light plants are often found
in office spaces where they are under fluorescent lighting.
Monstera, spider plants, and rubber plants are common medium light plants. Finally,
low light plants do well if they have some distance from the window or if the window
is under a porch. North-facing windows provide ample light for low-light plants.
These plants are often grown for their foliage rather than flowers. Some examples
include snake plant, pothos and philodendron.
However, there is a more scientific method than simply estimating the amount of light
a plant gets. Light is measured in units such as lumens or foot-candles. A foot-candle
is the amount of light from a single candle that falls on a one-square-foot surface,
one foot away from the candle. A foot-candle is equal to one lumen per square foot.
By measuring the amount of light a plant receives, you can better select locations
in your home that will be suitable for plants.
Watering and Container Selection
Another common question regarding houseplants relates to watering. Improper watering
is one of the top causes for houseplant decline. Watering and container selection
can go hand-in-hand. As a rule, containers must have some type of drainage hole,
whether you use a plastic liner or a terra cotta pot. Plastic liners can easily
be disguised by placing the entire pot in a decorative planter.
When watering, be sure that you are soaking the soil thoroughly, as evidenced by
water running out of the drainage holes. For most plants, water when the top inch
of soil is dry. Bottom watering is another common watering technique. . This can
be done by placing the pot in a container or sink with water in it and allowing
the water to soak into the potting mix. This ensures optimum moisture throughout
the potting mix.
When repotting plants, size up by only 1-2 inches. Extra soil can cause extra moisture,
leading to root rot. If your plants do have some root rot or extra soil, it may
be beneficial to remove the plant from its pot to fully inspect the roots. Root
rot is evident by smell or by soft, brown roots. Healthy roots should be white
and vigorous. If roots are tight and wound together, the plant is root-bound and
will need to be repotted. This can also be evident by an increase in the number
of times the plant needs watered. When repotting root-bound plants, be sure to
break up and prune the roots so that they do not continue to wind together. When
root pruning, remove about one third of the old roots.
There are some plants that have pots specifically designed for them. For example,
you can find pots that are made for African Violets. These pots, often called self-watering,
are usually in two pieces, one is a reservoir for water, another wicks water and
maintains the correct moisture level for the plant. This allows you to avoid watering
the plant from above. Another example is for orchids. Orchids are epiphytes, meaning
they grow on something, such as a tree or a rock outcropping. Their roots need
a good bit of air circulation to keep from rotting, so orchid pots have holes in
them to increase air movement and water drainage.
Potting Medium Selection
The selection of potting medium or mix should largely depend on the type of plant
you are potting. For example, cacti and succulents will need a different mix than
ferns. There are several acceptable, commercially made potting mixes available
for houseplants, and you can use them for the basis of your mix if you choose to
make your own. Be sure to research the needs of your individual plant to best determine
the soil mix that will fit its needs.
Common Pests and Diseases
As with any plant, there is potential for pests and diseases with houseplants, even
if they are continually kept indoors. A good practice is to “scout” plants prior
to purchasing for insects, and to quarantine new plants in an area away from your
current plants for a week or two. For many pests, a good spray of water can remove
them. Be sure to check under the leaves for pests as that is where many like to
hide.
Aphids are small insects that feed on the branch tips and underside of leaves.
Mealybugs appear “cottony” and are somewhat sticky to the touch. They are often
found on cacti and succulents, as well as poinsettia and African violets. They
cause stunted growth and distorted leaves. They can be picked off or you can
use a cotton swab that has been dipped in alcohol.
Whiteflies are gnat-like and white. They feed on leaves and cause them to turn
pale yellow or white.
Thrips are extremely small insects that feed on foliage and flowers, causing them
to distort and discolor.
Spider mites are small and oval-shaped. These feed on the sap from plants. They
may cause plants to have a speckled or mottled appearance and produce webbing.
Fungus gnats are more of a nuisance in the adult stage. However, the larvae feed
on organic matter and the roots, which can cause a reduction in plant vigor.
They can often be controlled by reducing the amount of moisture in the media
and avoid over-watering.
Some of the more common diseases that affect houseplants include root rot, powdery
mildew, gray mold and leaf spot fungus. Other disorders are often due to environmental
factors, including over/under watering, excess salts in the potting media and temperature.
Choosing Your Houseplant
Generally, look for healthy plants that are free of pests at the time of purchase.
You will also need to consider the environment that the plant is going to be introduced
to. Is it drafty? What type of light is available? Will you be gone for several
days at a time? These are just a few of the considerations you will need to take
prior to purchasing a plant. Cost can also be a factor. If you want to start small,
consider rooted cuttings or small plants which will cost less than a larger, more
mature plant. Below are a few common and easy-care houseplants.
Plant Name
Lighting Needs
Soil Needs
Water Needs
Other Considerations
African Violet
Saintpaulia ionantha
Filtered sunlight
200-500 ftc
Prefers to be slightly rootbound; container should be no more than 1/3 width
of plant’s span
Evenly moist
Do not get the leaves wet; bottom water
Fiddleleaf Fig
Ficus lyrata
Filtered light; can go outside, but should be hardened off to sunlight
Over 500 ftc
Likes to be rootbound
Evenly moist
Likes to be somewhat cool at night
Monstera deliciosa
Bright, indirect light
Over 500 ftc
Well drained soil
Evenly moist
Cannot tolerate full sun, use a stake to support the plant to encourage new
growth
Peace Lily
Spathiphyllum
Filtered light
25-100 ftc.
Well drained, but damp (not sopping wet)
Evenly moist
Hardy plant, can be a little fussy when dry
Philodendron
Indirect/dappled light
100-500 ftc
.
Well drained, like to be slightly root-bound
Evenly moist
Easy maintenance, consider staking to encourage growth
Pothos
Epipremnum aureum
Filtered light
100-500 ftc.
Well drained
Soak, and then let dry between waterings
Easy maintenance, consider staking to encourage growth
Rubber Plant
Ficus
Filtered light
100-500 ftc.
Well drained, evenly moist
Evenly moist
Moderately easy to care for
Snake Plant
Sanseveria
Filtered to bright light
100-500 ftc.
Well drained
Drench, then allow to dry completely
Easy maintenance, avoid over-watering
Spider Plant
Chlorophytum
Filtered light
100-500 ftc.
Well drained
Evenly moist
Easy maintenance, will produce “pups” that can be propagated
Succulents
Bright light
4+ hours direct sun
Well drained
Soak occasionally and allow to completely dry out between waterings
Avoid over watering, easy maintenance
Sources:
Houseplant care – gardening solutions
. UF/IFAS Extension Gardening Solutions.
https://gardeningsolutions.ifas.ufl.edu/plants/houseplants/houseplant-care.html
Light for houseplants
. UF/IFAS Extension Gardening Solutions. https://gardeningsolutions.ifas.ufl.edu/plants/houseplants/light-for-houseplants.html
Trinklein, D. H. (2017, July 1).
Caring for Houseplants
. Caring for Houseplants | MU Extension. https://extension.missouri.edu/publications/g6510?p=1
Weisenhorn, J., & Hoidal, N. (2024).
Lighting for indoor plants and starting seeds
. UMN Extension. https://extension.umn.edu/planting-and-growing-guides/lighting-indoor-plants#low-light-plants-1622110
WVU Extension Master Gardener Manual, chapter XVII, pg. 6-12. Indoor Plants.
Jennifer Friend, WVU Extension Agent—Harrison County
September 2024
WVU is an EEO/Affirmative Action Employer -- Minority/Female/Disability/Veteran.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights regulations and policies, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, and reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs).
The WVU Board of Governors is the governing body of WVU. The Higher Education Policy Commission in West Virginia is responsible for developing, establishing, and overseeing the implementation of a public policy agenda for the state’s four-year colleges and universities.
Reasonable accommodations will be made to provide this content in alternate formats upon request. Contact the WVU Extension Service Office of Communications at 304-293-4222.