UC IPM
Home and Landscape
Home and Landscape
Aphids
Updated: 07/2013
On this page
Quick Tips
Pest Notes: Introduction
Identification
Life Cycle
Damage
Management
References
Resources
Publication Information
On this page
Quick Tips
Pest Notes: Introduction
Identification
Life Cycle
Damage
Management
References
Resources
Publication Information
Quick Tips
Most plants have one or more aphid species that feed on it, but feeding usually does not damage or kill established plants.
Aphids can curl leaves and produce sticky honeydew that may attract ants and sooty mold. Aphids have many naturally occurring predators and parasites that feed on them. On sturdy plants, aphids can be knocked off with a strong stream of water. When aphid numbers are high and other control methods aren’t effective, pesticides such as insecticidal soaps and oils are available.
Aphids are common in gardens and landscapes.
Aphids feed on soft, new plant growth. Protect young plants. Don’t over fertilize; use slow-release products.
Aphids build up on flowering plums, roses, tulip trees, crape myrtles, apples, and many vegetables. Expect aphids when you grow these plants.
Most established plants can tolerate aphid feeding and will outgrow any damage.
How can I reduce aphid numbers?
Prune infested leaves and stems.
Knock aphid populations off plants by shaking the plant or spraying it with a strong stream of water.
Protect seedlings with covers or aluminum foil mulches.
Wait for hot weather; some aphids are heat-intolerant and will be gone by mid-summer.
Are there any good bugs that will eat aphids?
Naturally occurring insect predators such as lady beetles and lacewings will visit plants when aphids are abundant. The larval, or immature stage, of these “natural enemies” most often feed on aphids. Ants protect aphids from natural enemies. Keep ants off plants to help beneficial insects do their job. Encourage natural enemies by avoiding the use of broad-spectrum insecticides that can be toxic to them and by planting flowering plants that provide nectar and pollen for them. Common natural enemies of aphids include:
Lady beetles (ladybugs
Lacewings
Syrphid fly larvae
Soldier beetles
Tiny parasitic wasps that turn aphids into crusty, round “mummies”
What about pesticides?
Use nonchemical methods first to manage aphids.
If insecticides seem necessary, choose products that are less toxic to natural enemies, such as commercially available insecticidal oils and soaps. When properly used, these materials solve most aphid problems.
Oils and soaps work by smothering aphids, so apply these products thoroughly. Don’t apply them to drought-stressed plants or when it is very hot. Some plants are sensitive to these products.
Aphids hidden within curled leaves will not be affected by pesticides that work on contact. Prune these out.
Systemic insecticides can kill hidden aphids, but they are much more toxic and might also harm bees and other beneficial insects on flowering plants.
Download a
PDF of this Quick Tips
. Descargue un
PDF de estos Notas Breves
.
Read more Quick Tips for this pest
Pest Notes: Introduction
Aphids are small, soft-bodied insects with long slender mouthparts that they use to pierce stems, leaves, and other tender plant parts and suck out fluids. Almost every plant has one or more aphid species that occasionally feed on it. Many aphid species are difficult to distinguish from one another; however, management of most aphid species is similar.
Identification
Aphids have soft pear-shaped bodies with long legs and antennae and may be
green
, yellow, brown, red, or black depending on the species and the plants they feed on. A few species appear
waxy
or
woolly
due to the secretion of a waxy white or gray substance over their body surface. Most species have a pair of tubelike structures called
cornicles
projecting backward out of the hind end of their body. The presence of cornicles distinguishes aphids from all other insects.
Generally adult aphids are wingless, but most species also occur in winged forms, especially when populations are high or during spring and fall. The ability to produce winged individuals provides the pest with a way to disperse to other plants when the quality of the food source deteriorates.
Although they may be found singly, aphids often feed in
dense groups
on leaves or stems. Unlike
leafhoppers
,
plant bugs
, and certain other insects that might be confused with them, most aphids don't move rapidly when disturbed.
Some Common Aphids by Habitat
Table 1. Common Aphids on Vegetables and Flowers.
Common name
Scientific name
Common hosts
Bean aphid
Aphis fabae
Legumes, various woody ornamentals, and flowers
Cabbage aphid
Brevicoryne brassicae
Cole crops and other mustard family plants
Green peach aphid
Myzus persicae
Peppers, spinach, tomato, cucurbits, carrot, lettuce, legumes, corn, flowers, flowering plum, and stone fruit
Melon (cotton) aphid
Aphis gossypii
Cucurbits, carrot, citrus, many flowers, and various woody landscape ornamentals
Potato aphid
Macrosiphum euphorbiae
Potato, spinach, lettuce, tomato, and many others
Table 2. Common Aphids of Fruit Trees.
Common name
Scientific name
Common hosts
Comments
Green apple aphid
Aphis pomi
Apple, pear, hawthorne, cotoneaster
Leaf curl plum aphid
Brachycaudus helichrysi
Plum, prune
Curls leaves, goes to Asteraceae in summer
Mealy plum aphid
Hyalopterus pruni
Plum, prune
Curls and stunts leaves, goes to cattails and reeds in summer
Rosy apple aphid
Dysaphis plantaginea
Apple
Curls leaves, goes to plantain in summer
Woolly apple aphid
Eriosoma lanigerum
Apple, pear, pyracantha, hawthorn
Primarily found on wood or roots, creates galls in roots and waxy deposits
Table 3. Some Problematic Aphids on Woody Ornamentals. Green peach aphid, bean aphid, and melon aphid may also occur on many woody ornamentals.
Common name
Scientific name
Common hosts
Comments
Ash leaf curl aphid
Prociphilus
species
Ash (other Prociphilus species attack other trees)
Causes leaves to curl, distort, and form pseudo-galls
Crapemyrtle aphid
Sarucallis kahawaluokalani
Crape myrtle
Giant conifer aphid
Cinara species
Fir, pine, spruce, cedar
May be mistaken for ticks
Hackberry woolly aphid
Shivaphis celti
Hackberry
Produces waxy tufts
Oleander aphid
Aphis nerii
Oleander, milkweed
Rose aphid
Macrosiphum rosae
Rose
Tuliptree aphid
Illinoia liriodendri
Tuliptree
Life Cycle
Aphids have
many generations a year
. Most aphids in California's mild climate reproduce asexually throughout most or all of the year with adult females giving birth to live offspring—often as many as 12 per day—without mating. Young aphids are called nymphs. They molt,
shedding their skin
about four times before becoming adults. There is no pupal stage. Some species produce sexual forms that mate and produce
eggs
in fall or winter, providing a more hardy stage to survive harsh weather and the absence of foliage on deciduous plants. In some cases, aphids lay these eggs on an
alternative host
, usually a perennial plant, for winter survival.
When the weather is warm, many species of aphids can develop from newborn nymph to reproducing adult in seven to eight days. Because each adult aphid can produce up to 80 offspring in a matter of a week, aphid populations can increase with great speed.
Damage
Low to moderate numbers of leaf-feeding aphids aren't usually damaging in gardens or on trees. However, large populations can turn leaves yellow and
stunt shoots
; aphids can also produce large quantities of a sticky exudate known as honeydew, which often turns black with the growth of a
sooty mold fungus
. Some aphid species inject a toxin into plants, which causes leaves to curl and further distorts growth. A few species cause
gall formations
.
Aphids may transmit viruses from plant to plant on certain vegetable and ornamental plants. Squash, cucumber, pumpkin, melon, bean, potato, lettuce, beet, chard, and bok choy are crops that often have aphid-transmitted viruses associated with them. The viruses mottle, yellow, or curl leaves and stunt plant growth. Although losses can be great, they are difficult to prevent by controlling aphids, because infection occurs even when aphid numbers are very low; it takes only a few minutes for the aphid to transmit the virus, while it takes a much longer time to kill the aphid with an insecticide.
A few aphid species attack parts of plants other than leaves and shoots. The
lettuce root aphid
is a soil dweller that attacks lettuce roots in spring and summer, causing lettuce plants to wilt and occasionally die. In fall, this species often moves to poplar trees, where it overwinters in the egg stage and produces
leaf galls
in spring. The
woolly apple aphid
infests woody parts of apple roots and limbs, often near pruning wounds, and can cause overall tree decline if roots are infested for several years. Heavy infestations of crown and root aphids on carrots may weaken tops, causing them to tear off when carrots are harvested.
Leaf curling caused by rosy apple aphid. Credit: Jack Kelly Clark, UC IPM
Management
Although aphids seldom kill a mature plant, the damage they do and unsightly honeydew they generate sometimes warrant control. Consider the nonchemical controls discussed below, as most insecticides will destroy beneficial insects along with the pest. On mature trees, such as in citrus orchards, aphids and the honeydew they produce can provide a valuable food source for beneficial insects.
Monitoring
Check your plants regularly for aphids—at least twice a week when plants are growing rapidly—in order to catch infestations early, so you can knock or hose them off or prune them out. Many species of aphids cause the greatest damage in late spring when temperatures are warm but not hot (65°-80°F). For aphids that cause leaves to curl, once aphid numbers are high and they have begun to distort leaves, it's often difficult to control these pests, because the curled leaves shelter aphids from insecticides and natural enemies.
Aphids tend to be most prevalent along the upwind edge of the garden and close to other infested plants of the same species, so make a special effort to check these areas. Many aphid species prefer the underside of leaves, so turn leaves over when checking for aphids. On trees, clip off leaves from several areas of the tree. Also check for evidence of natural enemies such as lady beetles, lacewings, syrphid fly larvae, and the mummified skins of parasitized aphids. Look for disease-killed aphids as well; they may appear off color, bloated, flattened, or fuzzy. Substantial numbers of any of these natural control factors can mean the aphid population may be reduced rapidly without the need for treatment.
Ants are often associated with aphid populations, especially on trees and shrubs, and frequently are a clue that an aphid infestation is present. If you see large numbers of ants climbing your tree trunks, check higher up the tree for aphids or other honeydew-producing insects that might be on limbs and leaves. To protect their food source, ants ward off many predators and parasites of aphids. Managing ants is a key component of aphid management. (See Cultural Control.)
In landscape settings, you can monitor aphids by using
water-sensitive paper
to measure honeydew dripping from a tree.
This type of monitoring
is of particular interest where there is a low tolerance for dripping honeydew, such as in groups of trees along city streets or in parks and for tall trees where aphid colonies may be located too high to detect. (See
Pests of Landscape Trees and Shrubs
in References for more details.)
Biological Control
Natural enemies can be very important for controlling aphids, especially in gardens not sprayed with broad-spectrum pesticides (e.g., organophosphates, carbamates, and pyrethroids) that kill natural enemy species as well as pests. Usually natural enemy populations don't appear in significant numbers until aphids begin to be numerous.
Among the most important natural enemies are various species of
parasitic wasps
that lay their eggs inside aphids. The skin of the parasitized aphid turns crusty and golden brown, a form called a
mummy
. The
generation time
of most parasites is quite short when the weather is warm, so once you begin to see mummies on your plants, the aphid population is likely to be reduced substantially within a week or two.
Mummified aphid bodies indicate that they have been parasitized. The parasitic wasp (center) has emerged from the circular hole in the top left mummy. Credit: Jack Kelly Clark, UC IPM
Many predators also feed on aphids. The most well known are
lady beetle
adults and larvae,
lacewing
larvae,
soldier beetles
, and
syrphid fly
larvae. Naturally occurring predators work best, especially in garden and landscape situations. For photos and more information about aphid natural enemies, see the
Natural Enemies Gallery
.
Lady Beetle Releases
Applying commercially available lady beetles (the
convergent lady beetle
,
Hippodamia convergens
) may give some temporary control when properly handled, although most of them will disperse from your yard within a few days.
If releasing lady beetles, keep them refrigerated until just before letting them go, doing so at dusk, as those released in broad daylight will fly away immediately. Mist the lady beetles with water just before release, and also mist the surface of the plant you are releasing them onto. Place the lady beetles at the base of infested plants or in the crotches of low branches. Lady beetles will crawl higher into the plant in search of aphids. University of California research indicates that high numbers of lady beetles are required to control aphids. One large, heavily infested rose bush required two applications, spaced a week apart, of about 1,500 lady beetles each. For more information about making lady beetle releases, see UC IPM's
convergent lady beetle page
in the Natural Enemies Gallery.
Aphids are very susceptible to
fungal diseases
when it is humid. These pathogens can kill entire colonies of aphids when conditions are right. Look for dead aphids that have turned reddish or brown; they'll have a fuzzy, shriveled texture unlike the shiny, bloated, tan-colored mummies that form when aphids are parasitized.
Weather can also impact aphids. Summer heat in the Central Valley and desert areas reduces the populations of many species, and aphid activity is also limited during the coldest part of the year. However, some aphids may be active year-round, especially in the milder, central coastal areas of California.
Ant Management
In some situations
ants tend aphids
and feed on the honeydew aphids excrete. At the same time, ants protect the aphids from natural enemies. If you see ants crawling up aphid-infested trees or woody plants, put a
band of sticky material
(e.g., Tanglefoot) around the trunk to prevent ants from climbing up. (Don't apply sticky material directly to the bark of young or thin-barked trees or to trees that have been severely pruned, as the material may have phytotoxic effects. Wrap the trunk with fabric tree wrap or duct tape and apply sticky material to the wrap.) Alternatively,
ant stakes
or containerized baits may be used on the ground to control ants without affecting aphids or their natural enemies. Prune out other ant routes such as branches touching buildings, the ground, or other trees.
Cultural Control
Before planting vegetables, check surrounding areas for sources of aphids and remove these sources. Some aphids build up on weeds such as
sowthistle
and
mustards
, moving onto related crop seedlings after they emerge. On the other hand, these aphid-infested weeds can sometimes provide an early source of aphid natural enemies. Always check transplants for aphids and remove them before planting.
Where aphid populations are localized on a few curled leaves or new shoots, the best control may be to prune out these areas and dispose of them. In large trees, some aphids thrive in the dense inner canopy; pruning out these areas can make the habitat less suitable.
High levels of nitrogen fertilizer favor aphid reproduction, so never use more nitrogen than necessary. Instead, use a less soluble form of nitrogen and apply it in small portions throughout the season rather than all at once. Slow-release fertilizers such as organic fertilizers or urea-based time-release formulations are best.
Because many vegetables are susceptible to serious aphid damage primarily during the seedling stage, reduce losses by growing seedlings under
protective covers
in the garden, in a greenhouse, or inside and then transplanting them when the seedlings are older and more tolerant of aphid feeding. Protective covers will also prevent transmission of aphid-borne viruses.
Silver-colored reflective mulches
have been successfully used to reduce transmission of aphid-borne viruses in summer squash, melon, and other susceptible vegetables. These mulches repel invading aphid populations, reducing their numbers on seedlings and small plants. Another benefit is that yields of vegetables grown on reflective mulches are usually increased by the greater amount of solar energy reflecting onto leaves.
To put a reflective mulch in your garden, remove all weeds and cover beds with mulch. Bury the edges with soil to hold them down. After the mulch is in place, cut or burn 3- to 4-inch diameter holes and plant several seeds or a single transplant in each one. In addition to repelling aphids, leafhoppers, and some other insects, the mulch will enhance crop growth and control weeds. When summertime temperatures get high, however, remove mulches to prevent overheating plants.
Ready-to-use reflective mulch products include silver-colored plastic sold in rolls. You can also make your own by spray-painting construction paper, landscape fabric, or clear plastic. If you use plastic mulches, you will need to use drip irrigation underneath. Landscape fabric and most paper mulches will allow water to flow through.
Another way to reduce aphid populations on sturdy plants is to knock off the insects with a strong spray of water. Most dislodged aphids won't be able to return to the plant, and their honeydew will be washed off as well. Using water sprays early in the day allows plants to dry off rapidly in the sun and be less susceptible to fungal diseases.
Chemical Control
When considering whether to apply insecticides for aphid control, remember that most larger plants can tolerate light to moderate levels of aphids with little damage. Larger aphid populations often rapidly decline due to biological control or when hot temperatures arrive. Often a forceful spray of water or water-soap solution, even on large street trees, when applied with appropriate equipment, will provide sufficient control.
If insecticides are needed,
insecticidal soaps
and oils are the best choices for most situations. Oils may include petroleum-based
horticultural oils
or plant-derived oils such as
neem
or
canola oil
. These products kill primarily by smothering the aphid, so thorough coverage of infested foliage is required. Apply these materials with a high volume of water, usually a 1 to 2% oil solution in water, and target the underside of leaves as well as the top. Soaps, neem oil, and horticultural oil kill only aphids present on the day they are sprayed, so applications may need to be repeated. Although these materials can kill some natural enemies that are present on the plant and hit by the spray, they leave no toxic residue so they don't kill natural enemies that migrate in after the spray.
These and other insecticides with contact-only activity are generally ineffective in preventing damage from aphids such as the leaf curl plum aphid or the woolly ash aphid, which are protected by galls or distorted foliage. Also, don't use soaps or oils on water-stressed plants or when the temperature exceeds 90°F. These materials may be phytotoxic to some plants, so check labels and test the materials on a portion of the foliage several days before applying a full treatment.
Supreme- or superior-type oils will kill overwintering eggs of aphids on fruit trees if applied as a delayed-dormant application just as eggs are beginning to hatch in early spring. (On plums dormant applications right after leaves have fallen in early November are preferred.) These treatments won't give complete control of aphids and probably aren't justified for aphid control alone but will also control soft scale insects if they are a problem. Common aphid species controlled with these types of oils include the woolly apple aphid, green apple aphid, rosy apple aphid, mealy plum aphid, and black cherry aphid.
Many other insecticides are available to control aphids in the home garden and landscape, including foliar-applied formulations of
malathion
,
permethrin
, and
acephate
(nonfood crops only). While these materials may kill higher numbers of aphids than soaps and oils, their use should be limited, because they also kill the natural enemies that provide long-term control of aphids and other pests, and they are associated with bee kills and environmental problems. Repeated applications of these materials may also result in resistance to the material.
Insecticides such as oils and soaps are also safer to use when children and pets may be present. Formulations combining insecticidal soaps and pyrethrins may provide slightly more knockdown than soaps alone yet have fewer negative impacts on natural enemies than malathion, permethrin, and acephate, because pyrethrins break down very quickly.
Systemic insecticides are also available for aphid management, primarily for woody ornamentals. These materials, including
imidacloprid
, are very effective and are especially useful for serious infestations of aphids such as the woolly hackberry aphid, which is often not effectively controlled by biological control or less toxic insecticides. Imidacloprid can have negative impacts on predators, parasitoids, and pollinators, so its use should be avoided where soaps and oils will provide adequate control. To protect pollinators, don't apply imidacloprid or other systemic insecticides to plants in bloom or prior to bloom.
Home-use soil-applied imidacloprid products are often diluted with water in a bucket and poured around the base of the tree or plant. Professional applicators can use soil injectors, which provide better control with less runoff potential. Applications are usually made in spring when aphids first become apparent.
Adequate rain or irrigation is required to move the product through the soil to the roots and up into large trees, and it may take several weeks to see an effect on aphids feeding on leaves. One application on hackberry is enough to control hackberry woolly aphid for two to three years. See
Pest Notes: Hackberry Woolly Aphid
for more discussion about control methods using imidacloprid.
The pesticide information on this page may become out of date as products and active ingredients change or become unavailable. Some of the pesticides listed are only available for use by licensed pesticide applicators. No endorsements of named products are intended, nor is criticism implied of products not mentioned.
References
Bugg, R. L., R. G. Colfer, W. E. Chaney, H. A. Smith, and J. Cannon. 2008.
Flower flies (Syrphidae) and Other Biological Control Agents for Aphids in Vegetable Crops
. Oakland: Univ. Calif. Agric. Nat. Res. Publ. 8285.
Dreistadt, S. H., J. K. Clark, T. A. Martin, and M. L. Flint. 2016.
Pests of Landscape Trees and Shrubs: An Integrated Pest Management Guide
.
3rd ed. UC ANR Publication 3359. Oakland, CA.
Flint, M. L. 2018.
Pests of the Garden and Small Farm: A Grower's Guide to Using Less Pesticide
, 3rd ed. UC ANR Publication 3332. Oakland, CA.
Lawson, A. B., and S. H. Dreistadt. 2014.
Pest Notes:
Hackberry Woolly Aphid
. UC ANR Publication 74111. Oakland, CA.
Resources
About Pest Notes
Glossary
Compare Risks from Pesticides Mentioned
WARNING ON THE USE OF PESTICIDES
List of other Pest Notes
Publication Information
Pest Notes
: Aphids
UC ANR Publication 7404
Author(s)
M.L. Flint (emeritus), UC IPM and Entomology, UC Davis