Quick facts
Common name - Leaf damage on houseplants
1
Plants affected - Indoor plants
2
Main causes - Cultural conditions
3
Timing - All year
4
Discover RHS Gardens for free with an RHS Membership
25% off
Join today
Appearance
Leaves can show symptoms as follows:
Leaves turn brown and then drop
Brown tips or margins to the leaves
Leaves turn uniformly yellow, or irregularly yellow
Leaves remain green but fall
Spots on leaves
Loss of
variegation
Variegated means having leaves or other plant parts with streaks, blotches or patches of different colours. Typically, these would be a combination of two colours, such as green and gold or green and white.
Oedema
Nutrient deficiencies
Leaf deformation
Secretions
Symptoms, cause and control
Leaves turn brown and fall
Where entire leaves turn brown and then fall, particularly the lower leaves, this is often an indication of underwatering and excessive heat. Wilting and browning of leaves at the top of the plant are also a sign of underwatering. The upper leaves of
shade-loving plants
will often turn brown if they are placed in too much light. Whole plant collapse (where a plant suddenly turns brown all over and dies) may be caused by sudden changes in the environment, and in particular over-watering. Leaves can also be bruised by passing pets and people. As brown leaves are a common symptom with more than one cause accurate diagnosis often depends on what other signs of ill-health are also present.
Control:
Tip the plant gently out of its pot and check the condition of the roots. If roots are brown, rotted and soft consider whether you need to increase or more likely reduce
watering
. Move plant to a cooler or shadier position as required.
Brown leaf tips or margins
Brown tips or margins to the leaves may indicate over or more likely under-watering, which can be assessed by checking the roots. They may also be a sign of too dry an atmosphere, or poor
ventilation
The introduction of outdoor air into a space, for example, a greenhouse. This airflow can reduce temperature, replenish the gases absorbed by plants and keep down fungal diseases like grey moulds.
in a greenhouse or conservatory. Over-watering often causes browning in the middle of the leaves.
Control:
Increase or decrease
watering
as necessary. If the atmosphere is too dry (i.e. low
humidity
The concentration of water vapour in the atmosphere. This affects the rate at which plants transpire (lose water from their leaf pores), which in turn affects how much water their roots absorb from the soil. If air humidity is low, plants transpire quickly and become at risk of wilting if water is lost from the leaves faster than it can be absorbed by the roots. Different plants require different levels of humidity to thrive. Many tropical houseplants need high humidity and are best grown in a steamy bathroom, misted regularly or placed on a saucer of damp pebbles. In a greenhouse, humidity can be raised in hot weather by damping down (wetting) the floor or overhead misting.
) mist plants regularly (at least three times a day) or, better, place on a tray of damp gravel, expanded clay granules (Hydroleca) or recycled lightweight aggregate (Hortag). Add water, ensuring the level is always below the top of the gravel, clay granules or aggregate. As the water gradually evaporates it increases humidity around the plant. Also
improve airflow
. Choose plants that match the conditions.
Yellow leaves
It is normal for the odd lower leaf on a mature plant to yellow and fall. However, yellowing of leaves in large numbers may be caused by a wide range of factors; too much or too little water,
overpotting
(i.e. potting up into too large a
container
), too shady a position, too cold a temperature, a sudden drop in temperature or exposure to draughts. If lime-hating plants (such as
Gardenia
) have upper leaves turning yellow but staying firm they may be suffering from excess calcium, and thus reduced availability of iron or manganese or both in the
compost
Can refer to either home-made garden compost or seed/potting compost: • Garden compost is a soil improver made from decomposed plant waste, usually in a compost bin or heap. It is added to soil to improve its fertility, structure and water-holding capacity. Seed or potting composts are used for growing seedlings or plants in containers - a wide range of commercially produced peat-free composts are available, made from a mix of various ingredients, such as loam, composted bark, coir and sand, although you can mix your own.
(see nutrient deficiencies) - or the prolonged use of hard water instead of rain water.
Control:
Check the plant roots to see if they appear too wet/dry (dark, soft, brittle roots indicate poor root health), and adjust watering accordingly. Repot into a smaller container if in too large a pot (i.e not filled by plant roots). Dry
rootball
The roots and accompanying soil when a plant is removed from a container or lifted from the ground.
with kitchen towel if it is soggy when repotting. Consider the environment and place the houseplant in a more suitable position – houseplants benefit from brighter positions, south facing windowsills for example, in winter when light levels are lower. Too much light or sunshine in the middle of the day can cause leaves to droop, or scorch yellow. Many houseplants dislike draughty positions – particularly in
winter
. Move to a better location when temperatures drop.
Spots on leaves
Dark spots with yellow margins on leaves may be due to fungal leaf spot, but white or straw-coloured spots or rings are likely to be due to cold (i.e. not room temperature) water splashes, aerosol damage or
watering
with cold water. Pale coloured spots may also develop if plants have too much sun or from aerosol damage on exposed surfaces.
Control:
Treat fungal diseases with approved fungicides. Avoid using cold water (allow it to become room temperature before use e.g for
orchids
). Avoid using aerosols (leaf shine products or insecticide products). Move plants to a shadier position if in a bright window.
Loss of variegation
Variegation
Variegated means having leaves or other plant parts with streaks, blotches or patches of different colours. Typically, these would be a combination of two colours, such as green and gold or green and white.
may vary during the year and is often less apparent in late summer. Where there is a permanent loss of variegation, (and reversion can be ruled out) inadequate light is often the cause. Waterlogging may also lead to loss of variegation or leaf colour.
Reversion
can occur where more vigorous green shoots outgrow the
variegated
Variegated means having leaves or other plant parts with streaks, blotches or patches of different colours. Typically, these would be a combination of two colours, such as green and gold or green and white.
shoots.
Control:
Ensure variegated plants are in good light. Improve drainage if necessary. Prune out reverted growths whenever they occur on variegated plants.
Oedema
Raised corky patches of tissue on the undersides of leaves represents the late stages of
oedema
. This is caused by excessive water uptake (often linked to overwatering) and is worst in situations where there is a lack of airflow and a humid atmosphere.
Control:
Seasonal factors may encourage oedema but where it occurs regularly,
improve airflow
around affected plants. Ensure regular, but not excessive
watering
. Do not remove affected leaves.
Nutrient deficiencies
Lack of colour in the tips of leaves, with poor growth, may be due to a shortage of
nutrients
To grow well, plants need a wide range of nutrients in various amounts, depending on the individual plant and its stage of growth. The three key nutrients usually taken up from the soil are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Plants also need carbon, oxygen and hydrogen to make carbohydrates — their main energy source. Carbon and oxygen come from the air as carbon dioxide, while hydrogen is drawn from water absorbed by the roots. Other important soil nutrients include magnesium, calcium and sulphur. Most garden soils contain enough of these nutrients to support healthy plant growth.
in general, particularly nitrogen. Interveinal yellowing in ericaceous plants (such as
Gardenia
, azalea) may also be due to lime-induced
chlorosis
caused by iron, magnesium or manganese being unavailable in non-ericaceous potting compost or induced by prolonged watering with hard tap water. Rain water, water from a dehumidifier or air-condition unit are ideal. However any form of root stress such as under or over watering can induce nutrient deficiencies. Over-feeding with potassium-rich fertiliser can induce magnesium deficiency.
Control:
Repot using an ericaceous potting medium (if appropriate), removing as much old potting media as feasible. Water with rain water (allow to warm to room temperature particularly in winter). Use a foliar feed (liquid fertiliser diluted and sprayed on leaves) to correct the problem. Consider whether other causes are responsible - drought, over-watering,
pot-bound plant
etc.
Leaf deformation
Where leaves are crinkled or creased it is usually due to stop/start development. This may be caused by variation in temperatures particularly from night to day, but is usually due to irregular watering when new leaves are developing. If kept in bright light in a dry atmosphere, leaves of certain plants (
Maranta
for example) curl inwards (concave). Cold and dry conditions may cause leaf margins to curl outwards (convex).
Saintpaulia
and
Gloxinia
are examples.
Control:
Ensure plants are kept away from draughts or fluctuating temperatures. Water regularly - perhaps checking one day a week and watering little and often in summer, maybe every fortnight in winter. The aim should be to scrupulously avoid soggy potting media and bone-dry conditions, and aim for moist potting media. Consider whether the plant is in the ideal position and move if necessary.
Secretions
When houseplants are in active growth and warm daytime temperatures are followed by cold night temperatures, stress ruptures of cells may occur, releasing sugary exudates - this is known as
guttation
A process by which some plants lose excess water by exuding sap droplets overnight through specialized pores called hydathodes, usually found at leaf margins. This process helps plants relieve water pressure in their cells and avoid damage. It is often seen as a result of overwatering, and can be mistaken for early morning dew drops.
. Some houseplants, such as
Plumbago auriculata
, produce a natural whitish deposit on the underside of the leaves. Some plants produce sticky deposits on the leaves in response to cultural stress. Common examples include
Cymbidium
,
Ctenanthe
,
Philodendron
,
Tibouchin
a and
Zantedeschia
. Such symptoms indicate poor growing conditions.
Control:
Improve cultural conditions; avoid excess watering. Consider
repotting
the plant in spring. Regular feeding and watering should help avoid these conditions.
Problems
Various pests and diseases can also cause discolouration of leaves.
Common pests include
aphids
,
glasshouse red spider mite
,
leafhopper
,
mealybug
,
scale insects
and
whitefly
.