Quick facts
Common name - Oedema
1
Scientific name - Oedema
2
Plants affected - Various; including cacti, camellias, eucalyptus, fuchsia, orchids, pelargonium, succulents and vines
3
Main causes - Excessively high moisture levels in soil or air
4
Timing - All year
5
What is oedema?
Oedema is a disorder of plants caused by the roots taking up more water than the leaves can transpire. This excess water ruptures the cells, particularly on the undersides, and leads to water-soaked patches that turn corky and unsightly.
Symptoms
A plant suffering from oedema may show a number of symptoms:
Water-soaked spots appear first on the leaves. These then become raised, warty or pimple-like swellings or growths
The growths can rupture and have a white, powdery appearance or may become rust-coloured and appear as scaly patches. These can sometimes be confused with other disorders or diseases, such as
fuchsia rust
Corky spots or ridges may develop, particularly on woody plants such as
camellias
Prevention
Once oedema has occurred, affected leaves should not be picked off as this will make the condition worse. Instead, improve conditions (see below) both in the air and soil to encourage healthy new growth to develop.
For conservatory or glasshouse plants
, maintain adequate
ventilation
The introduction of outdoor air into a space, for example, a greenhouse. This airflow can reduce temperature, replenish the gases absorbed by plants and keep down fungal diseases like grey moulds.
especially in hot, sunny weather to allow the air to circulate. Make sure you
water
the plants carefully and do not allow the plants to completely dry out or become
waterlogged
. Both will impair the roots ability to function well.
If
container plants
show signs of oedema, check the
compost
Can refer to either home-made garden compost or seed/potting compost: • Garden compost is a soil improver made from decomposed plant waste, usually in a compost bin or heap. It is added to soil to improve its fertility, structure and water-holding capacity. Seed or potting composts are used for growing seedlings or plants in containers - a wide range of commercially produced peat-free composts are available, made from a mix of various ingredients, such as loam, composted bark, coir and sand, although you can mix your own.
is free-draining. If plants are too wet, repotting with fresh compost is advisable.
Plants frequently affected include: cacti, echeveria and the semi-succulent
Peperomia
spp., some greenhouse fruit,
orchids
and
pelargonium
(greenhouse geraniums).
If
outdoor plants
such as
camellias
or
eucalyptus
show signs of oedema, check the soil condition for
waterlogging and flooding
, particularly following heavy rain. Improve soil texture by incorporating organic matter such as
leaf mould
or well-rotted manure and do not plant on
clay soil
when very wet. For plants growing in permanent containers, decrease watering and try to improve drainage by using pot feet or repotting, if necessary.
Causes
The main causes of oedema include:
Excessively moist conditions in the soil or growing medium, in the atmosphere, or in combination, which give the plant cells an unusually high water content
When foliage is reduced by the removal of leaves or shoots
Occasionally oedema can occur as a reaction to some chemical sprays such as insecticide or fungicide