HOME
CURRENT
ARCHIVES
EDITORIAL BOARD
RULES FOR AUTHORS
REVIEW PROCESS
ETHICS
CONTACT
LOGIN
REGISTER
REGISTER
LOGIN
Login
Password
Forgot password?
Plant Protection News (Vestnik Zashchity Rasteniy)
Submit an Article
About the Journal
Aims and Scope
“Plant Protection News”
("Vestnik Zashchity Rasteniy")
is a scientific peer-reviewed journal which publishes results of original research, reviews, discussion notes and chronicles related to plant protection.
The Journal scope covers all aspects of plant growing related to plant health, including, but not restricted to, biology, ecology, taxonomy, identification and rearing of harmful and beneficial organisms; forecast and management of pests, diseases and weeds; plant immunity; pesticide resistance etc.
The Journal promotes modern methods of plant protection, including development of resistant plant varieties and biological means of pest control; phytosanitary monitoring of agroecosystems; innovative approaches, technologies, economics and ecological safety of plant protection applications.
Scientific papers accepted for print should adhere to
the Author Guidelines
and
the Code of Ethics
to avoid false information, plagiarism, multiple and redundant publications.
General Information
Four issues are published per year. Papers are issued in Russian and English, and abstracts are provided in both languages to all scientific articles.
Founded in 1939, continued in 1999.
ISSN 2308-6459
(Online),
ISSN 1727-1320
(Print)
Publisher:
All-Russian Institute of Plant Protection.
Registered in Govermental Comitee of Print of Russian Federation under # 017839 of July 03 1998.
Indexing and Archiving
Starting from April 2025,
"Plant Protection News"
is indexed in
Scopus
.
Starting from September 2024, the Edition is indexed by
Russian Science Citation Index (RSCI)
.
The journal is indexed in
CrossRef
(DOI: 10.31993/1727-1320) providing valid DOI for the published scientific papers.
As an Open Access Journal, Plant Protection News is indexed in Directory of Open Access Journals (
DOAJ
), as well as Directory of Open Access Scholarly Resources (
ROAD
) at the
ISSN Portal
.
Full-text versions of published materials are archived at the
Journal website
and National Electronic Library
eLIBRARY.RU
. Authors are encouraged to deposit their published papers in the scientific social network
ResearchGate
and other resources. The policy allowing the authors to deposit versions of their work in an institutional or other repository of their choice is registered in the Directory of Open Access Policies
Sherpa/Romeo
.
All-Russian Institute of Plant Protection is listed among the Publishers participating in the
Initiative for Open Citations
and
Initiative for Open Abstracts
.
Higher Attestation Commitee
at the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of Russian Federation includes "Plant Protection News" in its Index of Editions Recommended for Publishing to the authors planning to defend dissertations in the fields of Entomology; Mycology; General Agronomy; Plant Selection, Seed Production and Biotechnology; Agrochemistry, Plant Protection and Quarantine; Horticulture, Vegetable Growing, Viticulture and Medicinal Plants.
Open Access Policy
Full content of the Journal's issues are available for free immediately after publication at the journal's website under the Libre Open Access model adhering to
the respective definition, as given by DOAJ
.
The full-text articles are made accessible at the Journal's website (
Archives section
), which is planned by the Publisher to be used for electronic backup and preservation of access even if the Journal is no longer published. Another option to freely access the full Journal's content is the
National Electronic Library
. The list of sources to the Journal's archive is updated on regular basis.
The journal's policy doesn't imply advertisement materials
Navigate
Home
Editorial Board
For Authors
Publishing Ethics
Archives
Contact
LOGIN
Links
VIZR
Web of Science
Springer
Elsevier
ProQuest
ELibrary
Crossref