Quick facts
Suitable for - all gardeners
1
Timing - all year round
2
Difficulty - easy to moderate
3
Suitable for...
People are increasingly looking for more environmentally sensitive ways to cultivate plants. There are many common-sense steps you can take to prevent harmful organisms entering or spreading round your garden. Good cultural control, plant selection and encouraging natural predators are especially important.
Choose your plants carefully
Take action to keep pests and diseases out of your garden and protect your plants from damage by considering the following:
Right plant, right place
Plants thrive if they’re in a suitable environment. By selecting the right plant for your region’s climatic conditions it will grow more healthily and be less susceptible to pests and diseases. For example, moisture loving plants will struggle in counties where rainfall is scant. Even within the garden itself, areas offer different conditions (
microclimates
) such as rain shadows or frosty hollows, so choose and position your plants accordingly.
Consider avoiding problem species
If you have plants you cherish in your garden, but pests and diseases affecting that species are widespread, think carefully before you bring new plants into your garden. Examples include agapanthus (
agapanthus gall midge
), aquilegia (
aquilegia sawfly
) and box (
box blight
and
box tree moth caterpillar
).
Be additionally careful when choosing plants grown abroad
Supply chains can be long and some plants sold in UK garden centres may have begun their lives abroad. Aim to purchase plants from reputable suppliers produced in accordance with UK plant health regulations.
Imported semi-mature trees and shrubs
(especially those sold in their
native
A native plant is one that originated or arrived naturally in a particular place without human involvement. In the British Isles, native plants are those that were here during the last ice age or have arrived unaided since.
soil) which have not spent a
growing season
The period of time when an individual plant is in active growth. This will depend on the local climate and light levels, and can vary between different plants, although it is broadly from spring to autumn.
in the UK may carry an increased risk of harbouring exotic pests and diseases.
Ensure holiday purchases conform to the rules
It’s important to be particularly cautious when
purchasing plants
on
holiday abroad
. Also be careful buying from private suppliers abroad
over the internet
.
Select cultivars with resistance or tolerance to pests and diseases
Seed packets and plant labels generally highlight such characteristics. For example, new rose cultivars may offer some resistance to
black spot
for a period. Some potatoes such as ‘Charlotte’ fend off
slugs
. In areas with soil infections such as
club root
, seek resistant brassicas. See our lists of plants that are less susceptible to
verticillium wilt
,
honey fungus
and
phytophthora root rot
to help you avoid plant loss.
Ensure plants you purchase are healthy and thriving
Don’t be tempted by less healthy ones on the discount shelf. They will be more vulnerable to pests and diseases, even if they don’t have them already. If plants are grown well by the producer and cared for by the
garden centre
, they will get off to a better start in your garden.
Check and monitor new arrivals
Tip out pots to check for root pests such as
vine weevil grubs
. Before planting out in the garden, consider isolating new arrivals and monitoring their health. This is especially important for plants imported from abroad.
Grow your plants well
Choose the best spot in your garden
Follow the ‘right plant, right place’ mantra and consider the needs of individual plants. Mediterranean plants are more suited to the warmth of home, so site in a sunny spot; woodland dwellers grow better in the cool of dappled shade.
Test your soil
As
pH
This describes how acid or alkaline soil is, and is expressed as a number between 0 and 14. Soil with a pH of 7 is neutral, an acid soil has a lower value, and an alkaline soil has a higher one. Most plants grow best in soil that’s within a specific pH range, so it’s useful to know your soil’s pH. Testing kits are easy to use and widely available in garden centres and online.
may affect the nutrient uptake by plants, consider a
soil test
before permanent planting. Undertake every four years for annual or vegetable plots.
Plant well
A little extra care at
planting time
– teasing roots out of rootballs, firming in and watering - will get plants off to a flying start. Break up compaction before planting to help drainage and aeration.
Look after your plants
Provide the right amount of
water
. This will vary through the seasons. Pay special attention to new plants for the first two years while they
establish
. Most soils provide adequate
nutrition
for ornamental plants. You may consider a foliar feed later in summer if signs of nutrient deficiency appear, such as yellowing between the leaf veins.
Reduce stress by mulching well
This protects against water loss, may add
nutrients
To grow well, plants need a wide range of nutrients in various amounts, depending on the individual plant and its stage of growth. The three key nutrients usually taken up from the soil are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Plants also need carbon, oxygen and hydrogen to make carbohydrates — their main energy source. Carbon and oxygen come from the air as carbon dioxide, while hydrogen is drawn from water absorbed by the roots. Other important soil nutrients include magnesium, calcium and sulphur. Most garden soils contain enough of these nutrients to support healthy plant growth.
and in time, improves soil structure. It can also bury fungal spores like those that cause
rose black spot
. These may otherwise splash up a re-infect plants.
Mulching
can also inhibit the spread of root disease and some pests.
Wise practice
Garden in a way that cuts down potential for disease spread and development. This could include ample spacing between plants and avoiding overhead watering. Also consider good air circulation, such as opening greenhouse vents to improve air flow or pruning your apple tree to give an open centre. However such precautions are not failsafes against disease.
Keeping one step ahead
If you monitor your plants and are careful with
garden hygiene
Regular cleaning and tidying not only keeps a garden looking neat, but can reduce pests and diseases too. Beneficial jobs include collecting fallen leaves, promptly removing diseased growth and debris, cleaning tools, and weeding. Still, too much tidying can discourage wildlife, so it’s a fine balance.
in specific areas or at particular times of year, this will go a long way to blocking the spread of problem pests and diseases which may be present in the environment.
Look out for seasonal issues and weather-related problems
Anticipate problems such stress-related
powdery mildew
. Patrol for
slugs
in damp conditions before holes in leaves occur.
Anticipate specific plant-related pests and diseases
Some pests and diseases have a limited host range, such as
downy mildew of lettuce
,
tomato blight
,
potato blight
or
currant blister aphid
. This knowledge may help you take preventative action.
Be vigilant and take preventative action to stop spread
Nip population explosions of insects such as
aphids
‘in the
bud
A bud is a small, undeveloped shoot that contains the potential for new growth. Buds are typically found on stems, where they can be apical (found at the tip) or axillary (found between leaf axils) and may develop into leaves, shoots or flowers.
’ or pick off mouldy leaves as they appear on house plants. Use sticky traps or pheromone traps to see if pest populations are increasing so treatment can be anticipated.
Garden hygiene
Clean tools, pots and disinfect pruning tools:
Pay special attention to vulnerable areas like greenhouses, potting benches, knives for taking cuttings, pots and seed trays. Clean muddy boots. Clods of soil moving round a garden, or from allotment to home, can spread soil-borne disease such as
club root
of brassicas and
Phytophthora root rot
. Even clothes can act as a vehicle for dispersal of pests and diseases.
Reduce disease potential in stored water:
Clean gutters, disinfect
water butts
and rotate their use. Even so, only use mains water on
cuttings
A method of growing new plants from parts of an existing plant, such as sections of root, stem, leaf or bud. When prepared correctly and planted in the right conditions, they can produce roots and eventually become independent plants. There is a wide range of different methods for taking cuttings, depending on the plant and time of year.
and young plants.
Weeds can be a reservoir for problems:
They can compete for resources, harbour disease and provide cover for moisture-loving pests like
slugs
. Some act as alternative hosts for pests and diseases, for example,
rosy apple aphids
migrate to plantains in summer.
Dispose of diseased materials appropriately:
Your
compost heap
won’t get hot enough to destroy persistent diseases like
honey fungus
. Some dead plants are best sent to local authority
composting
Composting
is the process by which plant material is heaped together to rot (decompose) to produce compost. Garden or kitchen waste can be broken down over time in a compost bin or heap to produce crumbly organic matter that can be used as a mulch, soil conditioner and a constituent of potting compost.
sites, buried on site, or burned. See our page on
disposing of diseased material
. Only stack healthy materials to create nature habitats.
Other cultural suggestions
Practise crop rotation
If you move crops on your vegetable plots each season (
rotation
), it helps reduce potential accumulation of soil-borne pests and diseases specific to certain crops, for example parsnip canker.
Natural tonics
Some naturally occurring substances, called bio stimulants, have been recorded as having beneficial effects on plants’ defence mechanisms. One example is willow
bark mulches
that contain salicic acid. Other organisms such as naturally occurring mycorrhizal fungi can help protect plants from root diseases. Adding
mycorrhizal fungi
on planting may protect the plant, however fertilisers can reduce their activity and the fungi may be specific to a particular host plant.
Soil health
The zone immediately around plant roots - the rhizosphere - is full of beneficial soil microbes which help protect against soil-borne pathogens. They depend on plant roots. Sowing overwintering
cover crops
creates that root zone habitat which the bare earth of traditional winter vegetable gardens does not. Using
mulches
also supports these communities.
Timeliness
Prune during the right season for the species. For example, stone fruits such as cherries are best pruned in late spring or summer when the risk of
silver leaf infection
is less.
Some problems may be avoided by changing planting or harvesting times
For example, in heavy soils where
slugs
abound, grow well-chitted, second-early potatoes. These will be ready for harvest before the late season wave of slugs.
Lift and store
potatoes rather than leaving them to be attacked.
Pruning methods
Many fungal diseases such as
box blight
infect more easily in wet conditions, so prune in dry weather. Use sharp tools to create clean cuts that heal quickly.
Barrier methods
Take action by physically protecting crops. This might be shelters on your nectarine trees to ward off infection by airborne spores of
peach leaf curl
. Barriers keep off pests too: felt discs at the base of brassicas can prevent
cabbage root fly
attack and grease bands on fruit trees decrease egg laying by
winter moth caterpillar
.