Quick facts
Common names Thrips, greenfly, scale, mealybugs, glasshouse red spider mite / two-spotted spider mite
1
Scientific names Insects in the order Thysanoptera, True bugs (Hemiptera) in the Aphidoidea and Coccoidea, and
Tetranychus urticae
2
Most houseplants can be affected, but they are most commonly found on
Citrus
, orchids and succulents including cacti
3
Can be found at any time of year
4
Discover RHS Gardens for free with an RHS Membership
25% off
Join today
Which animals are sap feeders?
Many of the true bugs (Hemiptera) and other groups of insects including thrips (Thysanoptera) feed from plants by inserting their specialised, straw-like, mouth parts into plant
phloem vessels
Part of a plant's vascular system (internal plumbing) responsible for transporting sugars and other products of photosynthesis from leaves to the rest of the plant.
or by puncturing the outer layer of tissue and feeding from cells within. This allows them to access the plant
nutrients
To grow well, plants need a wide range of nutrients in various amounts, depending on the individual plant and its stage of growth. The three key nutrients usually taken up from the soil are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Plants also need carbon, oxygen and hydrogen to make carbohydrates — their main energy source. Carbon and oxygen come from the air as carbon dioxide, while hydrogen is drawn from water absorbed by the roots. Other important soil nutrients include magnesium, calcium and sulphur. Most garden soils contain enough of these nutrients to support healthy plant growth.
produced during
photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is the process by which plants make their own food, harnessing the energy in sunlight to fuse water (absorbed from the soil) and carbon dioxide (absorbed from the air) to create simple sugars.
.
Sap
Sap is a fluid that circulates through a plant's vascular system, in a similar way to blood moving through our veins. Phloem sap carries the sugars produced in the leaves by photosynthesis down to roots and other storage organs, as well as carrying minerals and hormones. Xylem sap is watery and transports nutrients absorbed by the roots upwards to the rest of the plant. Some plants leak sap from wounds or pruning cuts, and this is known as bleeding.
feeding insects can be found on different parts of plants, often in relatively inaccessible locations.
Aphids
form colonies often around
buds
A bud is a small, undeveloped shoot that contains the potential for new growth. Buds are typically found on stems, where they can be apical (found at the tip) or axillary (found between leaf axils) and may develop into leaves, shoots or flowers.
and new growth, the species of
scale
found indoors often occur close to the midrib or main veins on the underside of leaves,
mealybugs
can be found in small clusters around leaf axils, leaf sheaths and where plant tissues abut, creating natural crevices.
Thrips
can be found on both sides of leaves but are generally more numerous on leaf undersides.
Other sap feeding invertebrates can be found indoors but are more often found in glasshouses: e.g.
glasshouse red spider mite
,
glasshouse leafhopper
and
glasshouse whitefly
.
Symptoms
Aphid feeding can cause stunted growth with curled or distorted leaves
White cast skins of aphids can accumulate on the upper surface of leaves; they drop down from the leaves above
Glasshouse mealybug is usually first noticed as a fluffy white wax, the insects or their orange-pink eggs can be found underneath this substance
Some scale insects deposit their eggs under a covering of white waxy fibres
Discoloured leaves
Thrips feeding results in leaves becoming increasingly dull or silvery in appearance. Leaves with red spider mite damage show a fine pale mottling on the upper leaf surface.
Sticky leaves
With aphids, scale insects and mealybugs excess sugars are excreted as a sticky substance called honeydew. This lands on the leaves and stems were it is often colonised by
sooty moulds
These look like black or brown powder on upper leaf surfaces. They grow on sugar-rich honeydew produced by sap-sucking insects, or occasionally on sugary substances produced by the plant itself. In most cases, sooty mould is a tell-tale sign of an insect infestation.
, giving surfaces a blackened appearance. Thrips excrement spots look like small dollops of dark varnish
Webbing
A fine silk webbing may be seen on plants with red spider mite
1
of
5
Glasshouse thrips feeding damage
of
Glasshouse red spider mites on webbing
of
Mealybugs
of
Mealybugs
Pseudococcus
sp. on Cactus
of
Soft scale
Coccus hesperidum
on Bay
Laurus nobilis
Management
Here are our top tips for managing these insects on indoor plants:
Inspect
new purchases; insects are often first brought into the home or glasshouse on new plants. This is especially true of mealybugs and scale insects where the adult females do not fly or crawl far
Quarantine
new plants where possible in order to give eggs and nymphs a chance to develop and be recognised, this may also give any populations time to develop and enable you to spot them without risk of them spreading to your other plants
Monitor
house plants frequently so that action can be taken before damaging populations develop
Relocate
plants that are tolerant of outdoor UK conditions, moving them outside can often yield an improvement in their condition as the
sap
Sap is a fluid that circulates through a plant's vascular system, in a similar way to blood moving through our veins. Phloem sap carries the sugars produced in the leaves by photosynthesis down to roots and other storage organs, as well as carrying minerals and hormones. Xylem sap is watery and transports nutrients absorbed by the roots upwards to the rest of the plant. Some plants leak sap from wounds or pruning cuts, and this is known as bleeding.
feeding insects are then accessible to natural predators or cooler outdoor conditions can slow down their life cycles
Separate
plants with populations of sap feeding invertebrates from other unaffected houseplants to minimise spread within your collection
Tolerate
populations of sap feeding invertebrates where possible. Plants can tolerate some levels of mealybug, although populations can quickly build if left unchecked
Replace
plants heavily affected by scale or mealybugs; it can be simpler to dispose of heavily affected plants rather than try to eliminate mealybugs
Remove
severely affected plants. Consider removing plants supporting large populations of spider mites from glasshouses, especially in late summer before lower temperatures and shorter days induce the females to seek sheltered places where they will remain
dormant
Dormancy refers to a period of inactivity in plants, during which they slow down or stop their growth, conserving energy and resources. This is a natural process that helps them survive harsh conditions, such as winter or drought. Dormancy in seeds is a mechanism that prevents them germinating until environmental conditions are favourable for growth.
for the winter period
Reduce
unwanted plants in the glasshouse as this can reduce the number of host plants helping you to control populations, especially of glasshouse whitefly
Increase
ventilation
The introduction of outdoor air into a space, for example, a greenhouse. This airflow can reduce temperature, replenish the gases absorbed by plants and keep down fungal diseases like grey moulds.
, where sap feeding insects are present, this will help to check the growth of
sooty moulds
These look like black or brown powder on upper leaf surfaces. They grow on sugar-rich honeydew produced by sap-sucking insects, or occasionally on sugary substances produced by the plant itself. In most cases, sooty mould is a tell-tale sign of an insect infestation.
Increase
humidity
The concentration of water vapour in the atmosphere. This affects the rate at which plants transpire (lose water from their leaf pores), which in turn affects how much water their roots absorb from the soil. If air humidity is low, plants transpire quickly and become at risk of wilting if water is lost from the leaves faster than it can be absorbed by the roots. Different plants require different levels of humidity to thrive. Many tropical houseplants need high humidity and are best grown in a steamy bathroom, misted regularly or placed on a saucer of damp pebbles. In a greenhouse, humidity can be raised in hot weather by damping down (wetting) the floor or overhead misting.
, by regularly spraying plants with water. This will help move conditions away from those that favour glasshouse red spider mites, though this will not on its own control the mite. Plants grown at high temperatures in dry, overcrowded glasshouses are more liable to damaging populations of red spider mites
Clear out
plant debris, whether you have house plants, plants in a conservatory or plants in a glasshouse, dead leaves and other plant material can harbour sap sucking insects
Cleaning glasshouses
in winter can help reduce overwintering populations. Empty glasshouses can be cleaned thoroughly with a glasshouse disinfectant
Weeding
in and around the glasshouse can be kept in check as these may act as hosts for glasshouse red spider mite
Manual removal
is feasible for some sap feeding invertebrates. You can use fingers and thumbs to squash aphid colonies. Adult scales can be removed when seen but this may not reduce large populations. It can be difficult to remove red spider mites due to their size, mealybugs due to the locations in which they are most often found, whitefly adults and thrips due to their mobility
Traps
Sticky traps are not recommended out of doors as they often capture a large number of non-target invertebrates. In glasshouses they are still likely to catch non-target organisms including parasitoid wasp predators, that are released as biocontrol agents, so their use should be considered carefully. Inside the home they are less likely to catch other insects though they may not be considered visually attractive
Hang sticky yellow sheets (widely available from garden suppliers) above or among plants in greenhouses to trap adult whitefly, this can help monitor whitefly activity rather than give control
Hanging blue sticky traps (widely available from garden suppliers) above or among plants in glasshouses can trap thrips and help monitor and reduce numbers
Biocontrols
There are now
biological controls
available, from numerous suppliers, for all of these sap sucking invertebrates. They are most suitable for application in a glasshouse situation. All the biological controls are susceptible to
pesticides
Pesticides are substances designed to kill or control the growth and behaviour of living organisms. They are also known as plant protection products and include insecticides, fungicides, herbicides and molluscicides. The RHS doesn’t support the use of pesticides and recommends that gardeners use non-chemical control options whenever needed.
and so cannot be used in conjunction with most pesticidal controls.
Aphids
Some natural enemies of aphids can be purchased for use in greenhouses, including hoverfly larvae, lacewing larvae and several parasitoid wasps. More information about these can be found on the ‘
aphid predators
’ page.
Scale insects
The nematode
Steinernema feltiae
can be purchased for the management of soft scale, however, it has the potential to infect non-target animals so should therefore be used with care though indoors the opportunity for them to affect non-target insects should be minimal.
Glasshouse mealybug
There are both a ladybird larval predator (
Cryptolaemus montrouzieri
) and several species of parasitoid wasp available for use against mealybugs, however, they require relatively high temperatures and so in glasshouses they are only likely to be effective May-September.
Glasshouse thrips
There are a range of predators available for managing thrips including predatory mites, a bug (
Orius laevigatus
) and a beetle (
Atheta coriaria
). The nematodes
Steinernema feltiae
and
S. carpocapsae
can be purchased for the management of thrips, however, they have the potential to infect non-target animals so should therefore be used with care though indoors the opportunity for them to affect non-target insects should be minimal.
Glasshouse whitefly
The parasitoid wasp
Encarsia formosa
is an established biocontrol agent available from multiple suppliers, however, it requires introduction before plants are heavily affected. Parasitised whitefly nymphs turn black so it is easy to monitor progress. The predatory mite
Amblyseius andersoni
is known to be a whitefly egg predator and the predatory bug
Macrolophus pygmaeus
is available.
Glasshouse red spider mite
For red spider mite management there are predatory mites, a predatory midge and a predatory beetle available, for more information see our ‘
Glasshouse red spider mite
’ page.
Pesticides
We do not recommend
pesticide
A pesticide is a substance designed to kill or control the growth and behaviour of living organisms. It is also known as plant protection product and includes insecticides, fungicides, herbicides and molluscicides. The RHS doesn’t support the use of pesticides and recommends that gardeners use non-chemical control options whenever needed.
use due to the negative effects on wildlife and the environment, however, in indoor spaces these side effects are less relevant. When choosing management options start with cultural and biological strategies and only use pesticides if these have not been sufficient to reduce populations to tolerable levels. Pesticides vary in how long they persist in the environment; shorter-persistence products (usually certified for organic growing) are likely to be less damaging to non-target wildlife including the biological control agents.
Organic sprays
, such as natural pyrethrum or plant oils have a largely physical mode of action. These are broad spectrum so will kill a wide range of insects (including whitefly, thrips, scale insects, aphids and mealybug) and can give some control of glasshouse red spider mite. These pesticides have a very short persistence and so may require reapplication to keep numbers in check. Insects hidden in distorted leaves may be unaffected by these products. Plant oil and fatty acid products are less likely to affect larger insects like ladybirds
Plant invigorators
combine
nutrients
To grow well, plants need a wide range of nutrients in various amounts, depending on the individual plant and its stage of growth. The three key nutrients usually taken up from the soil are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Plants also need carbon, oxygen and hydrogen to make carbohydrates — their main energy source. Carbon and oxygen come from the air as carbon dioxide, while hydrogen is drawn from water absorbed by the roots. Other important soil nutrients include magnesium, calcium and sulphur. Most garden soils contain enough of these nutrients to support healthy plant growth.
to stimulate plant growth with surfactants or fatty acids that have a physical mode of action. These products contain some synthetic ingredients and so are not considered organic
Glasshouse fumigants
can be used in glasshouses. Glasshouse should be sealed and instructions on the product label must be followed. An organic fumigant based on garlic is available and can be used when crop plants are present. Products based on the synthetic pyrethroid permethrin are available
Contact action insecticides
include the synthetic pyrethroids lambda-cyhalothrin, deltamethrin and cypermethrin are more persistant. Products containing these active ingredients have long lasting action against insects including those that are beneficial
Systemic pesticides
, those with both systemic (absorbed and transported through plant tissues) and contact action, are available. These include Flupyradifurone, for use against insects on ornamentals and selected edibles, and the neonicotinoid insecticide acetamiprid which is the active ingredient in products labelled for insects and red spider mite. These pesticides are widely considered to be the most environmentally damaging, remain active for a long time and will kill beneficial invertebrates
Specific advice:
With grape vines in glasshouses, peel away the loose outer
bark
Bark is the outermost layer of woody plants (trees, shrubs and woody climbers). It is several cells thick and provides protection against physical damage, disease and environmental stresses. Bark comes in a wide variety of colours and patterns, and these can help gardeners when identifying plants. The fissures and crevices of bark on older plants also creates valuable habitat for many garden creatures as well as lichens and small plants.
to expose the scales before treatment
Sprays used against scale insects are most likely to affect the young (nymphal) stage, for some scales they are only present at certain times of year, however the scale insects most likely to be found indoors breed all year round
Dead scales can remain firmly attached to the plants. The success of any treatment can be gauged by the extent to which new growth remains free of scale insects
Due partly to the waxy covering mealybugs are difficult to control with insecticides, affected plants will need to be sprayed thoroughly. In many cases it may be impossible to eliminate mealybugs
Leaves affected by thrips will not regain their green colour, once it has been lost, even if the insect is no-longer present